and this year we got to go to Italy for
summer expedition the country famous for
food music and art but did you know it's
also famous the scooters but they're
very protective of their beloved
scooters so we were quite lucky to go to
their factory and make a one-off special
Blue Peter scooter warning if you like
motor vehicles this is right up your
street the hour just went crazy there's
time to leave
there are 16 million across the globe
loved by celebrities from Hollywood to
Bollywood with an unmistakable style
more of its own the best stir the little
Italian scooter it changed the world
the Vespa motor scooter is an Italian
icon that's loved all over the globe
there are Vespa owners clubs everywhere
who swing to Sydney Cape Town Tek
California Vespers have been used by
armies film stars Fire Brigades and even
been turned into works of art but not
the fastest scooters and some other
tides are easier to ride but the Vespa
uses Italian style and no matter when or
where a Vespa is bought it's always made
in one place pontedera is Italy in this
enormous Factory Vespers can be
assembled in just two hours 600 can be
turned out in one day alone how do they
do it we're about to find out the secret
of mass production whether you're making
staplers or scooter is to have a
production line rather than one worker
building one scooter and doing lots of
different job slowly on production lines
lots of workers each do the same small
job quickly unlocks of scooters the
skilled workers stay put and the
scooters come to them the best
production line in this Factory is
nearly a mile long today we're gonna
help build a scooter from start
to finish and not just any old Vespa
today we're going to build I never seen
before limited edition of one Blue Peter
Vespa
a boy I know all motor vehicles start
with a chassis a bit like the frame of
the bicycle the skeleton on which
everything else sits the unusual thing
about a Vespa chassis is it's all made
out of one solid bits of metal that
encloses the engine under the sea as
well as acting as a foot board and the
front cowling and it's all we were
together
bio robots look out then he does things
I saw amazing a little bit scary but
just in case you're worrying the
machines will put everyone out of a job
the robots work still has to be
inspected and finished by a human and
today the human is me the robots welding
can leave rough edges so I'm buffing the
metal to give a nice smooth surface
that's one chassis ready for the
production line and you can already tell
it's a mess well that chassis is the
secret to the Vespa success as we find
out at the factory's on-site museum a
step through shape of the classic Vespa
is everywhere now but in the 1950s if
you wanted to sit on a motorbike you had
to clamber over in 1945 at the end of
the Second World War
an Italian motorcycle manufacturer named
Enrico piaggio asked an aircraft
engineer core Avenal d'ascanio to
redesign this small cheap motor scooter
this is the problem
- scan yo had the brilliant idea of
pushing the engine backwards so it was
under the seat so you could step on but
best of all with the new design cowling
and foot well it meant he could keep his
shop Italian sooo clean from a splashes
on the road Belize it looked like a
Vespa sheltered signore piaggio now
Vespa means wasp in Italian and the
reason it looks like a wasp is because
of its tiny little waist
he loved the design and so did everybody
else 65 years later all vespers and all
motor scooters for that matter have the
same basic shape yep when it comes to
influence the little old Vespa is the
biggest scooter in the world back on the
production line the next step is to dip
the chassis in an electrostatic Bank
this gives it a special courting that
helps the tail stick to the metal and
painting is where the fun starts work up
a glue
when I finish painting our chassis it
gets air dried before being transferred
to the factory floor there are two
production lines running side by side
want to build the engine and want to
assemble the scooter itself as a
thousand people at work in this Factory
the production line only stops when
there's an emergency as you can see
we've got a chassis time to put oskins
it together this is where our standard
bloosh assy is going to become a
one-of-a-kind lupita Vespa not one other
scooter coming out of the factory would
look like ours and it soon takes shape
in the skilled hands of the production
line workers follow me and then the not
so skilled workers come in we add the
plastic trim that will give our special
Blue Peter Vespa its unique blue and
white color scheme with the production
line always on the move there's no time
for fumbling present robot when you need
one
all the electrics have to be checked the
wheels and the Italian drivers favorite
safety device Maureen it takes a
well-oiled machine to make a well-oiled
machine in less than two hours our
scooter reaches the end of the line
there's just the final finishing touch
to eyes our one-of-a-kind one in 16
million blue pizza Vespa is ready to hit
the road
perfect song a few hours ago this was
just a pile of metal and plastic but now
she's alive
whoo well walk shall we
tomorrow we hit the road again to build
the best pizza ever
if you're hungry for truffle hunting
dogs buffaloes and daredevil deliveries
the next life throws having a better hit
the squat you know the guys at the
Museum was surprisingly impressed with
our Vespa scooter they've actually
immortalized it in the Vesper museum
itself right now look at this
oh yeah awesome good stuff if you ever
go to that if you ever go there make
shoes anticipations let's not